Add 'What is a PWA' guide (#26569)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/progressive_web_apps/guides/what_is_a_progressive_web_app/index.md

---
title: What is a progressive web app?
slug: Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/What_is_a_progressive_web_app
---

{{PWASidebar}}

A progressive web app (PWA) is an app that's built using web platform technologies, but that provides a user experience like that of a platform-specific app.

## Platform-specific apps

> _Platform-specific apps_ are developed for a specific operating system and/or class of device, like an iOS or Android device, generally using an {{Glossary("SDK")}} provided by the platform vendor. They are usually distributed using the vendor's app store, where the user can find and install them, and they subsequently seem to the user like a permanent extra feature of their device, expanding its capabilities in some way.

Author: We had this discussion a few weeks back: both [MS](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/n/native-language) and [Google](https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#native) guides suggest avoiding this term. I had thought we decided to use "platform-specific apps", in line with web.dev.

The discussion is in Slack though so I can't link to it :(.

> _Platform-specific apps_ are developed for a specific operating system and/or class of device, like an iOS or Android device, generally using an {{Glossary("SDK")}} provided by the platform vendor. They are usually distributed using the vendor's app store, where the user can find and install them, and they subsequently seem to the user like a permanent extra feature of their device, expanding its capabilities in some way.

Author: Also, I think "SDK" is a good candidate for a glossary entry, and am happy to create it if this PR is approved.

> _Platform-specific apps_ are developed for a specific operating system and/or class of device, like an iOS or Android device, generally using an {{Glossary("SDK")}} provided by the platform vendor. They are usually distributed using the vendor's app store, where the user can find and install them, and they subsequently seem to the user like a permanent extra feature of their device, expanding its capabilities in some way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Platform-specific apps_ are developed for a specific operating system (OS) and/or class of device, like an iOS or Android device, generally using an {{Glossary("SDK")}} provided by the platform vendor. They are usually distributed using the vendor's app store, where the user can find and install them, and they subsequently seem to the user like a permanent extra feature of their device, expanding its capabilities in some way.
```

Minor, but since we use OS throughout the rest of the article, I thought it'd be good to associate the abbreviation with the actual term here.

The benefits of platform-specific apps include:

- **Easy for users to access**: Apps get their own icon on the device, making it easy for users to find and open them.
- **Offline and background operation**: Apps are able to operate when the user is not interacting with them and when the device is offline. This, for example, enables a chat app to receive messages when it is not open, and display a notification to the user. It also enables a news app to update in the background so it can show fresh content even if the device is offline.
- **Dedicated UI**: Apps get to implement their own distinctive, immersive UI.
- **OS integration**: Apps can be integrated into the host OS: for example, a messaging app can register as a share target, enabling users to select an image in the photo app and send it using the messaging app. Apps can also access device features such as the camera, GPS or accelerometer.

> - **App store integration**: Apps are distributed using the app store, giving users a single place to find them and a consistent way to decide whether they want to install them.

Author: > Do we want to add a "drawbacks" section or bullets ? Needing to be approved by the app store, costs, updating the app at long intervals, different codebases per SDK/OS? for negatives that are not listed as positives in the web sections, like updating the app at long intervals?

The thing about that is that they do tend to duplicate positives in the website section. I'd prefer to add them as positives in there, if there are some I have missed.

## Traditional websites

> Traditionally, websites are less like "something the user has" and more like "somewhere the user visits". Typically, a website: does not have a presence on the user's device when the user is not accessing it, can only be accessed by the user opening the browser and navigating to the site, and is highly dependent on network connectivity.

Author: I would say that "or clicking on a link in an application that automates that process" is another way of navigating there, isn't? Or am I misunderstanding what this means?

> Traditionally, websites are less like "something the user has" and more like "somewhere the user visits". Typically, a website: does not have a presence on the user's device when the user is not accessing it, can only be accessed by the user opening the browser and navigating to the site, and is highly dependent on network connectivity.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I basically rewrote what you wrote. Maybe "can only be accessed by visiting the site online, which requires network connectivity"

Like websites:

- PWAs are developed using standard web platform technologies, so they can run on multiple operating systems and device classes from a single codebase.
- PWAs can be accessed directly from the web.

But like platform-specific apps:

- [**PWAs can be installed on the device**](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Making_PWAs_installable). This means:

  - The PWA can be installed from platform's app store or installed directly from the web.
  - The PWA can be installed like a platform-specific app, and can customize the install process.
  - Once installed, the PWA gets an app icon on the device, alongside platform-specific apps.
  - Once installed, the PWA can be launched as a standalone app, rather than a website in a browser.

- [**PWAs can operate in the background and offline**](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Offline_and_background_operation): a typical website is only active while the page is loaded in the browser. A PWA can:

  - Work while the device does not have network connectivity.
  - Update content in the background.
  - Respond to push messages from the server.
  - Display notifications using the OS notificiations system.

> - PWAs can [use the whole screen](Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Create_a_standalone_app), rather than running in the browser UI.

Author: um, I think this was a mistake, even though it seems to work... I'll fix it anyway to be on the safe side.

> - PWAs can [use the whole screen](Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Create_a_standalone_app), rather than running in the browser UI.

Author: Links should be fixed now.

- PWAs can be integrated into the device, registering as share targets and sources, and accessing device features.
- PWAs can be distributed in app stores, as well as openly via the web.

> 

Reviewer: I think it'd be good to think of total beginners here and also explain how PWAs actually run. This section clearly explains the benefits of both worlds, but I think the missing piece is understanding that a PWA, even if it looks like a standalone app, still runs in the browser. It's the browser that installs it in the OS, and it's the browser that runs it eventually, even if it may not look like it to the end user.

I think this is important because we very often talk about the browser when talking about PWAs, without really saying why. And as a beginner, or someone coming from a native app background, that might feel weird since we focus so much on building "real" apps that are totally standalone. They might ask themselves: But why do they keep referring to the browser, I only see my app?

In fact, just below, on line 64, we say that the manifest is useful for the browser to install the PWA. So explaining the relationship between the browser and a PWA before that would help clarify this line.

### Technical features of PWAs

The fundamental technical features of a PWA are:

- It has a [web app manifest](Web/Manifest) file, which at a minimum provides information that the browser needs in order to install the PWA, such as the app name and icon.
- It has a [service worker](Web/API/Service_Worker_API), which at a minimum provides a basic offline experience.

#### Web app manifest

> A PWA must have a web app manifest, and the [manifest must include enough information for the browser to install the PWA](/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Making_PWAs_installable#the_web_app_manifest).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A PWA must have a web app manifest, and the [manifest must include enough information for the browser to install the PWA](Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Making_PWAs_installable#the_web_app_manifest).
```

The manifest can define many other aspects of the PWA's appearance, such as [theme](Web/Manifest/theme_color) and [background](Web/Manifest/background_color) colors, and its behavior, including its ability [to act as a share target](Web/Manifest/share_target) for data from other apps or [to handle particular file types](Web/Manifest/file_handlers).

#### Service worker

A PWA must have a service worker, and the service worker must implement at least a minimal offline experience.

> Service workers encourage an architecture in which the app's pages - that is, the traditional part of a website - implement the user interface, and the service worker implements a backend which can support [offline and background operation](Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Offline_and_background_operation), making the PWA behave more like an app than a website. This is because service workers can be started by the runtime when they are needed (for example, to handle a push notification).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Service workers encourage an architecture in which the app's pages - that is, the traditional part of a website - implement the user interface, and the service worker implements a backend that can support [offline and background operation](Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Offline_and_background_operation), making the PWA behave more like an app than a website. This is because service workers can be started by the runtime, or operating system, when they are needed (for example, to handle a push notification).
```

a short definition for "runtime" or should we glossary-ize it?

Author: I'm not sure what's best here. In other places I've used "browser" but @captainbrosset pointed out that this might confuse people, because it's happening in the background (https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/25305#discussion_r1142271328). The point is I suppose that the SW is started from outside the PWA, by "the system" - really whether it's the OS or the browser is an unimportant detail (and I guess for things like Chromebook they might even be the same. But I'm not sure what is good language here. I don't think "runtime" is great but I'm not sure "runtime or OS" is better.

Author: Now I see, at the end of that conversation linked above, [I said](https://github.com/mdn/content/pull/25305#discussion_r1152293868):

> I think it might be worth having some text at the start of this page to give this context: talking about how with an installed PWA, the browser is always there orchestrating things even if it's not visible as an app itself (which it is usually not). And that when we say "browser" in this doc that's what we are talking about. What do you think? I would like to merge this guide now as is and work on that in a follow-up, since it will be easier to discuss in a new PR I think.

...but then never followed it up. Maybe this PR is a good place to talk about this, since it's very introductory?

Reviewer: Haha, this is awesome, I just left a review comments about this exact point. I do think we need to do this in this PR. In fact, a little diagram might even help. Something super high-level and simple that shows the different between the browser UI and the browser engine, and that shows that the engine part is in the background and is present in PWAs too.

Reviewer: Regarding the runtime vs. browser vs. system phrasing, I just made a comment about it below (I hadn't seen this comment before reviewing). I'm suggesting to use "browser" here, but only after we've explained that the browser is always the one running the PWA, even if it seems like it's standalone.

> Service workers encourage an architecture in which the app's pages - that is, the traditional part of a website - implement the user interface, and the service worker implements a backend which can support [offline and background operation](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Offline_and_background_operation), making the PWA behave more like an app than a website. This is because service workers can be started by the runtime when they are needed (for example, to handle a push notification).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service workers encourage an architecture in which the app's pages - that is, the traditional part of a website - implement the user interface, and the service worker implements a backend which can support [offline and background operation](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Offline_and_background_operation), making the PWA behave more like an app than a website. This is because service workers can be started by the browser in the background when they are needed (for example, to handle a push notification).
```

### Progressive enhancement

While {{Glossary("Progressive Enhancement", "progressive enhancement")}} is a desirable attribute for most websites, it is especially important for PWAs, which expect to run on a wide range of devices and often use advanced Web APIs which may not be supported by all browsers.

> One basic component of this is that if the user visits your PWA on the web, and the browser/device can install it, then the user will be prompted to install it. If the browser/device can't install your PWA, then the user will be able to interact with it like a normal website.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One basic component of progressive enhancement is that, if the user visits your PWA on the web and the browser/device can install it, the user will be prompted to install it. If the browser/device can't install your PWA, the user can still interact with it like a normal website.
```

> One basic component of progressive enhancement is that, if the user visits your PWA on the web and the browser/device can install it, the user will be prompted to install it. If the browser/device can't install your PWA, the user can still interact with it like a normal website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One basic component of progressive enhancement is that, if the user visits your PWA on the web by entering its URL in a browser, the user can interact with the app like a normal website. But if the browser can install it, the user will be prompted to install it and the app will appear as a new feature on their device.
```

Feel free to ignore, but it felt clearer to me this way.

> PWAs should perform feature detection for advanced APIs, and provide an acceptable fallback experience. For example, the [Background Sync API](Web/API/Background_Synchronization_API) enables a PWA to ask a service worker to make a network request as soon as the device has connectivity. A classic use case for this is messaging. Suppose the user composes a message, but when the user tries to send the message, the device is offline. The Background Sync API enables the device to send the message in the background once the device is connected. On a device which does not support Background Sync, the app should let the user know that the message could not be sent, giving them the chance to try again later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PWAs should perform feature detection for advanced APIs and provide acceptable fallback experiences. For example, the [Background Sync API](Web/API/Background_Synchronization_API) enables a PWA to ask a service worker to make a network request as soon as the device has connectivity. A classic use case for this is messaging. Suppose the user composes a message, but when the user tries to send the message, the device is offline. The Background Sync API enables the device to send the message in the background once the device is connected. On a device that does not support Background Sync, the app should let the user know the message could not be sent, giving them the chance to try again later.
```

> PWAs should perform feature detection for advanced APIs and provide acceptable fallback experiences. For example, the [Background Sync API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Background_Synchronization_API) enables a PWA to ask a service worker to make a network request as soon as the device has connectivity. A classic use case for this is messaging. Suppose the user composes a message, but when the user tries to send the message, the device is offline. The Background Sync API enables the device to send the message in the background once the device is connected. On a device that does not support Background Sync, the app should let the user know the message could not be sent, giving them the chance to try again later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PWAs should perform feature detection for advanced APIs and provide acceptable fallback experiences.

For example, the [Background Sync API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Background_Synchronization_API) enables a PWA to ask a service worker to make a network request as soon as the device has connectivity. A classic use case for this is messaging. Suppose the user composes a message, but when the user tries to send the message, the device is offline. The Background Sync API enables the device to send the message in the background once the device is connected. On a device that does not support Background Sync, the app should let the user know the message could not be sent, giving them the chance to try again later.
```

The first sentence felt like something that should have more weight, and so should be its own paragraph.

PWAs have the benefits of websites, including:

- PWAs are developed using standard web platform technologies, so they can run on multiple operating systems and device classes from a single codebase.
- PWAs can be accessed directly from the web.

PWAs also have many of the benefits of platform-specific apps, including:

- [**PWAs can be installed on the device**](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Making_PWAs_installable). This means:

  - The PWA can be installed from platform's app store or installed directly from the web.
  - The PWA can be installed like a platform-specific app, and can customize the install process.
  - Once installed, the PWA gets an app icon on the device, alongside platform-specific apps.
  - Once installed, the PWA can be launched as a standalone app, rather than a website in a browser.

- [**PWAs can operate in the background and offline**](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Offline_and_background_operation): a typical website is only active while the page is loaded in the browser. A PWA can:

  - Work while the device does not have network connectivity.
  - Update content in the background.
  - Respond to push messages from the server.

>   - Display notifications using the OS notificiations system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Display notifications using the OS [notifications](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Notifications_API) system.
```

- PWAs can [use the whole screen](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/How_to/Create_a_standalone_app), rather than running in the browser UI.
- PWAs can be integrated into the device, registering as share targets and sources, and accessing device features.
- PWAs can be distributed in app stores, as well as openly via the web.

> ### PWAs and the browser

Reviewer: Thank you for adding this section. This is very helpful.

> When you visit a website in the browser, it's obvious that the website is "running in the browser". The browser UI provides a visible frame around the website including UI features like back/forward buttons and a title for the page, and the Web APIs your website calls are implemented by the browser engine. So the browser provides a kind of virtual machine for executing the website's code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you visit a website in the browser, it's obvious that the website is "running in the browser". The browser UI provides a visible frame around the website, including UI features like back/forward buttons and a title for the page. The Web APIs your website calls are implemented by the browser engine. The browser provides a kind of virtual machine for executing the website's code.
```

> When you visit a website in the browser, it's obvious that the website is "running in the browser". The browser UI provides a visible frame around the website including UI features like back/forward buttons and a title for the page, and the Web APIs your website calls are implemented by the browser engine. So the browser provides a kind of virtual machine for executing the website's code.

Reviewer: I would personally remove "it's obvious" here. I know it's not what you meant, but it's the sort of phrase I associate with "basic", or "simple" which I tend to stay away from to avoid making assumptions about the reader's level of expertise/understanding of a concept.

Maybe something like:

"When you visit a website in the browser, that website is visible within the UI of the browser, which displays a frame around it with features like back/forward buttons and a title for the page. The source code of the website, and the Web APIs it uses all run in the browser engine."

I would also get rid of "The browser provides a kind of virtual machine for executing the website's code" which I don't think adds much value on top of what's already been said.

Author: Fair point about "obvious". But I like the idea that you can _see_ it's "running in the browser". Would you be OK with something like:

> When you visit a website in the browser, it's visually apparent that the website is "running in the browser".

?

> PWAs typically look like platform-specific apps, so they usually don't have the browser UI around them, but they are, as a matter of technology, still websites. This means they need a browser engine, like Chrome or Firefox, to manage and run them. With a platform-specific app, it's the platform OS that manages the app, and provides an environment in which it runs. With a PWA, it's a browser engine that performs this background role, just like it does for normal websites.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PWAs typically look like platform-specific apps－usually displayed without the browser UI around them － but they are, as a matter of technology, still websites. This means they need a browser engine, like Chrome or Firefox, to manage and run them. With a platform-specific app, the platform OS manages the app, providing the environment in which it runs. With a PWA, a browser engine performs this background role, just like it does for normal websites.
```

> PWAs typically look like platform-specific apps, so they usually don't have the browser UI around them, but they are, as a matter of technology, still websites. This means they need a browser engine, like Chrome or Firefox, to manage and run them. With a platform-specific app, it's the platform OS that manages the app, and provides an environment in which it runs. With a PWA, it's a browser engine that performs this background role, just like it does for normal websites.

Reviewer: Suggestion to slightly rephrase "This means they need a browser engine, like Chrome or Firefox, to manage and run them"

"This means they need a browser engine, like the ones in Chrome, Firefox, or Safari, to manage and run them."

Just to make the distinction between browser, browser UI, and browser engine even clearer.

![Diagram comparing the runtime environment for traditional websites, PWAs, and platform-specific apps](pwa-environment.svg)

> In our documentation for PWAs, we sometimes refer to the browser playing this background role. We might say, for example, "the browser starts a PWA's service worker when a push notification is received". Here, the browser's activity is entirely in the background. From the PWA's point of view, it might as well be the operating system which started it, and for some systems, such as Chromebooks, there may not even be a distinction between "the browser" and "the operating system".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our documentation for PWAs, we sometimes refer to the browser playing this background role. We might say, for example, "The browser starts a PWA's service worker when a push notification is received." Here, the browser's activity is entirely in the background. From the PWA's point of view, it might as well be the operating system that started it. For some systems, such as Chromebooks, there may not even be a distinction between "the browser" and "the operating system."
```

### Technical features of PWAs

> 
> The fundamental technical features of a PWA are:

Author: ```suggestion

Because PWAs are websites, they have the same basic features as any other website: at least one HTML page, which very probably loads some CSS and JavaScript. Like a normal website, the JavaScript loaded by the page has a global {{domxref("Window")}} object and can access all the Web APIs that are available through that object.

Beyond that, a PWA have some additional features:
```

I wondered if it was also worth adding this to emphasise that PWAs have the "normal" website feature as as well. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: yes. add this. 👍

> - It has a [web app manifest](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest) file, which, at a minimum, provides information that the browser needs in order to install the PWA, such as the app name and icon.
> - It has a [service worker](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API), which, at a minimum, provides a basic offline experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A [web app manifest](/en-US/docs/Web/Manifest) file, which, at a minimum, provides information that the browser needs to install the PWA, such as the app name and icon.
- A [service worker](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API), which, at a minimum, provides a basic offline experience.
```

#### Service worker

A PWA must have a service worker, and the service worker must implement at least a minimal offline experience.

Service workers encourage an architecture in which the app's pages - that is, the traditional part of a website - implement the user interface, and the service worker implements a backend which can support [offline and background operation](/en-US/docs/Web/Progressive_web_apps/Guides/Offline_and_background_operation), making the PWA behave more like an app than a website. This is because service workers can be started by the browser in the background when they are needed (for example, to handle a push notification).

### Progressive enhancement

While {{Glossary("Progressive Enhancement", "progressive enhancement")}} is a desirable attribute for most websites, it is especially important for PWAs, which expect to run on a wide range of devices and often use advanced Web APIs which may not be supported by all browsers.

> One basic component of progressive enhancement is that, if the user visits your PWA on the web by entering its URL in a browser, the user can interact with the app like a normal website. But if the browser can install it, the user will be prompted to install it and the app will appear as a new feature on their device.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One basic component of progressive enhancement is that the application works for all users. When the user visits your PWA on the web by navigating to it, the user should be able to interact with the app as a fully functioning website. If the browser can install it, the progressive enhancement includes the prompt to install the app.
```

> PWAs should perform feature detection for advanced APIs and provide acceptable fallback experiences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default experience is a fully functioning website, with the PWAs performing feature detection for the advanced APIs that progressively enhance the experience, including the ability to install the app as a PWA.
```
Or we can change the heading to "Progressive enhancement and graceful degradation."

> For example, the [Background Sync API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Background_Synchronization_API) enables a PWA to ask a service worker to make a network request as soon as the device has connectivity. A classic use case for this is messaging. Suppose the user composes a message, but when the user tries to send the message, the device is offline. The Background Sync API enables the device to send the message in the background once the device is connected. On a device that does not support Background Sync, the app should let the user know the message could not be sent, giving them the chance to try again later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the [Background Sync API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Background_Synchronization_API) enables a PWA to ask a service worker to make a network request as soon as the device has connectivity. A classic use case for this is messaging. Suppose the user composes a message, but the device is offline when the user tries to send the message. The Background Sync API enables the device to send the message in the background once the device is connected. On a device that does not support Background Sync, the app should gracefully degrade the user experience, letting the user know the message could not be sent and giving them the chance to try again later.
```
